Add vector cubes (#59)
Open-EO/openeo.org: documentation/1.0/datacubes.md

## What are Datacubes?

> Datacubes are basically just multidimensional arrays. They are the way in which data is represented in OpenEO. They can provide a nice and tidy interface for spatiotemporal data as well as the operations you may want to execute on it. As they are arrays, it might be easiest to look at raster data as an example, even though datacubes can hold vector data as well. Our example data however consists of a 6x7 raster with 4 bands [`blue`, `green`, `red`, `near-infrared`] and 3 timesteps [`2020-10-01`, `2020-10-13`, `2020-10-25`], displayed here in an orderly, timeseries-like manner:

Reviewer: "basically just multidimensional arrays" I'd remove the "basically just" as it gives a lot of judging into the sentence. As I see this as a definition I think it should be more neutral.

Author: With some additional rephrasing:

```suggestion
Data is represented as datacubes in openEO, which are multidimensional arrays with additional information about their dimensionality. Datacubes can provide a nice and tidy interface for spatiotemporal data as well as for the operations you may want to execute on them. As they are arrays, it might be easiest to look at raster data as an example, even though datacubes can hold vector data as well. Our example data however consists of a 6x7 raster with 4 bands [`blue`, `green`, `red`, `near-infrared`] and 3 timesteps [`2020-10-01`, `2020-10-13`, `2020-10-25`], displayed here in an orderly, timeseries-like manner:
```

    <figcaption>An examplary raster datacube with 4 dimensions: x, y, bands and time.</figcaption>
</figure>

It is important to understand that datacubes are designed to make things easier for us, and are not literally a cube, meaning that the above plot is just as good a representation as any other. That is why we can switch the dimensions around and display them in whatever way we want, including the view below:

<figure>
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_flat.png" alt="Raster datacube flat representation: The 12 imagery tiles are now laid out flat as a 4 by 3 grid (bands by timesteps). All dimension labels are depicted (The timestamps, the band names and the x, y coordinates).">
    <figcaption>This is the 'raw' data collection that is our example datacube. The grayscale images are colored for understandability, and dimension labels are displayed.</figcaption>
</figure>

A vector cube on the other hand could look like this:

<figure>

>     <img src="./datacubes/vector.png" alt="Vector datacube: 2 geometries are depicted for the vector dimension, along with 3 timesteps along the time dimension and 4 bands.">

Reviewer: To not indicate functionality we won't implement, I suggest we use a figure here that deals with either lines or polygons but not with both at the same time.

Author: Not 100% decided yet, will wait for a final decision (and then I have to check how we created these images previously).

    <figcaption>An examplary vector datacube with 3 dimensions: 2 geometries are given for the vector dimension, along with 3 timesteps for the time dimension and 4 bands.</figcaption>
</figure>

> Vector data cubes and raster data cubes are special cases of data cubes. A raster data cube has at least two spatial dimensions (x and y) and a vector data cube has at least a dimension of type vector. Unfortunately, due to historical reasons, in openEO we currently **can not distinguish between a data cube and a raster data cube**. Therefore, we only distinguish between:

Reviewer 2: > are special cases of data cubes

The "special" sounds a bit like they're edge cases. I would just say raster and vector are the most common cases of data cubes (in the context of  EO applications).

* *vector data cubes* (i.e., a data cube **with** a dimension of type vector), and

> * non-vector data cubes (i.e., a data cube **without** a dimension of type vector), which we will simply refer to as a *raster data cubes* in the documentation.

Author: This is due to the fact that all processes right now return "raster-cubes", although they should likely only return "data cubes". Problematic processes are e.g. reduce_spatial and create_raster_cube. This leads to this whacky definition for now.

Author: We decided to break existing processes and will adopt the proposal.

## Dimensions

A dimension refers to a certain axis of a datacube. This includes all variables (e.g. bands), which are represented as dimensions. Our exemplary raster datacube has the spatial dimensions `x` and `y`, and the temporal dimension `t`. Furthermore, it has a `bands` dimension, extending into the realm of _what kind of information_ is contained in the cube.

The following properties are usually available for dimensions:

* name
* type (spatial/temporal/bands/vector/other)
* axis / number
* labels (usually exposed in metadata as nominal values _or_ extents)
* reference system / projection
* resolution / step size

> * unit (either explicitly specified or implicitly given by the reference system)

Reviewer 2: I might be misunderstanding, but what is the difference between unit and resolution/step size?

Author: It's just a matter of terminology for different types of dimensions. For some cases resolution makes more sense (e.g. spatial x and y) and for some, step size makes seems to be more commonly used in language. But yeah, usually they are somewhat interchangeable.

Reviewer 3: Example: for Landsat, resolution / step size for spatial x/y dimension is 30, unit is `m`; temporal data: resolution is `5`, unit is `days`.

Here is an overview of the dimensions contained in our example raster datacube above:

| # | name    | type     | labels                                                                      | resolution | reference system                    |
| - | ------- | -------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ----------------------------------- |
| 1 | `x`     | spatial  | `466380`, `466580`, `466780`, `466980`, `467180`, `467380`                  | 10m        | [EPSG:32627](https://epsg.io/32627) |
| 2 | `y`     | spatial  | `7167130`, `7166930`, `7166730`, `7166530`, `7166330`, `7166130`, `7165930` | 10m        | [EPSG:32627](https://epsg.io/32627) |
| 3 | `bands` | bands    | `blue`, `green`, `red`, `nir`                                               | 4 bands    | -                                   |
| 4 | `t`     | temporal | `2020-10-01`, `2020-10-13`, `2020-10-25`                                    | 12 days    | Gregorian calendar / UTC            |

> Dimension labels are usually either numerical or text (also known as "strings"), which also includes textual representations of timestamps or vectors for example. Dimensions with a natural/inherent order are always sorted. These are usually all spatial and temporal dimensions. Dimensions without inherent order, `bands` in openEO for example, retain the order in which they have been defined in metadata or processes (e.g. through [`filter_bands`](https://processes.openeo.org/#filter_bands)), with new labels simply being appended to the existing labels.

Reviewer 2: > Dimension labels ...  textual representations of  vectors 

I know this is just an example, but I wonder if it is a good idea to suggest that the geometries are stored textually in the labels. I don't think a practical implementation will take this approach (because you need to deserialize/serialize all the geometries all the time). Wouldn't it be better to just mention something like "label=geometry id", which  is pretty common practice, I'd suspect. 
The example diagram uses `Line_1` and  `Polygon_1`  for example.

Author: That's the open question we need get a common understanding about, see also https://github.com/Open-EO/openeo.org/issues/58

Author: I think the final decision was to encode the geometries in the labels as WKT.

<figure>
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_flat.png" alt="Raster datacube flat representation: The 12 imagery tiles are now laid out flat as a 4 by 3 grid (bands by timesteps). All dimension labels are depicted (The timestamps, the band names and the x, y coordinates).">
    <figcaption>This is the 'raw' data collection that is our example datacube. The grayscale images are colored for understandability, and dimension labels are displayed.</figcaption>
</figure>

A vector cube on the other hand could look like this:

<figure>
    <img src="./datacubes/vector.png" alt="Vector datacube: 2 geometries are depicted for the vector dimension, along with 3 timesteps along the time dimension and 4 bands.">
    <figcaption>An examplary vector datacube with 3 dimensions: 2 geometries are given for the vector dimension, along with 3 timesteps for the time dimension and 4 bands.</figcaption>
</figure>

> Vector data cubes and raster data cubes are common cases of data cubes in the EO domain. A raster data cube has at least two spatial dimensions (e.g. `x` and `y`) and a vector data cube has at least a vector dimension (e.g. `geometry`). These distinctions are just made so that it is easier to describe "special" cases of data cubes, but you can also define other types such as a temporal data cube that has at least a temporal dimension (e.g. `t`).

Author: ```suggestion
[Vector data cubes](https://r-spatial.org/r/2022/09/12/vdc.html) and raster data cubes are common cases of data cubes in the EO domain.
A raster data cube has at least two spatial dimensions (e.g. `x` and `y`) and a vector data cube has at least a vector dimension (e.g. `geometry`).
These distinctions are just made so that it is easier to describe "special" cases of data cubes, but you can also define other types such as a temporal data cube that has at least a temporal dimension (e.g. `t`).
```

<figure>
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_flat.png" alt="Raster datacube flat representation: The 12 imagery tiles are now laid out flat as a 4 by 3 grid (bands by timesteps). All dimension labels are depicted (The timestamps, the band names and the x, y coordinates).">
    <figcaption>This is the 'raw' data collection that is our example datacube. The grayscale images are colored for understandability, and dimension labels are displayed.</figcaption>
</figure>

A vector cube on the other hand could look like this:

<figure>
    <img src="./datacubes/vector.png" alt="Vector datacube: 2 geometries are depicted for the vector dimension, along with 3 timesteps along the time dimension and 4 bands.">
    <figcaption>An examplary vector datacube with 3 dimensions: 2 geometries are given for the vector dimension, along with 3 timesteps for the time dimension and 4 bands.</figcaption>
</figure>

[Vector data cubes](https://r-spatial.org/r/2022/09/12/vdc.html) and raster data cubes are common cases of data cubes in the EO domain.

> A raster data cube has at least two spatial dimensions (e.g. `x` and `y`) and a vector data cube has at least a vector dimension (e.g. `geometry`).

Reviewer 2: did we already settle on the term "vector dimension"?
I recall the suggestion somewhere to use "geometry dimension"

Author: No, we can discuss the name freely.

Author: rename it to geometry  and geometry dimension

These distinctions are just made so that it is easier to describe "special" cases of data cubes, but you can also define other types such as a temporal data cube that has at least a temporal dimension (e.g. `t`).

## Dimensions

A dimension refers to a certain axis of a datacube. This includes all variables (e.g. bands), which are represented as dimensions. Our exemplary raster datacube has the spatial dimensions `x` and `y`, and the temporal dimension `t`. Furthermore, it has a `bands` dimension, extending into the realm of _what kind of information_ is contained in the cube.

The following properties are usually available for dimensions:

* name

> * type (`spatial`, `temporal`, `bands`, `vector` or `other`)

Author: Yes, but these are coming from STAC and are used in metadata. Diverging from that could be a bit confusing, I think. But we can clarify here that spatial means raster.

* axis / number
* labels (usually exposed in metadata as nominal values _or_ extents)
* reference system / projection
* resolution / step size
* unit (either explicitly specified or implicitly given by the reference system)

Here is an overview of the dimensions contained in our example raster datacube above:

| # | name    | type     | labels                                                                      | resolution | reference system                    |
| - | ------- | -------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ----------------------------------- |
| 1 | `x`     | spatial  | `466380`, `466580`, `466780`, `466980`, `467180`, `467380`                  | 10m        | [EPSG:32627](https://epsg.io/32627) |

> | 2 | `y`     | spatial  | `7167130`, `7166930`, `7166730`, `7166530`, `7166330`, `7166130`, `7165930` | 10m        | [EPSG:32627](https://epsg.io/32627) |

Reviewer 3: looks lke `x` has 200 m resolution and `y` -200 m resolution in this case?

Author: It's 200m x 200m, indeed. But we don't do negative resolutions AFAIK.

| 3 | `bands` | bands    | `blue`, `green`, `red`, `nir`                                               | 4 bands    | -                                   |
| 4 | `t`     | temporal | `2020-10-01`, `2020-10-13`, `2020-10-25`                                    | 12 days    | Gregorian calendar / UTC            |

Dimension labels are usually either numerical or text (also known as "strings"), which also includes textual representations of timestamps or vectors for example.

> Usually, vector labels (geometries) are encoded as [Well-known Text (WKT)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry) and temporal labels are encoded as [ISO 8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601) compatible dates and/or times.

Reviewer 2: We discussed this elsewhere I think, but are WKT strings a good choice for labels?

- the WKT string can become very large (kilobytes or worse), which does not make it a handy label to work with in the different phases of a user workflow
- there is quite some room for variation in WKT encoding of a geometry due to float representation/precision or  vertex ordering.

Reviewer 2: Side question: what does the "usually" refer to here: "usually in the remote sensing/GIS community", or "usually in openEO implementations"?

Author: ```suggestion
For example, geometries (i.e. the labels of a geometry dimension) can be encoded in [Well-known Text (WKT)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry) or GeoJSON like temporal labels are usually encoded as [ISO 8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601) compatible dates and/or times.
```

Author: The labels can be chosen by the user, could be ID, WKT2, any other attribute. Doesn't need to be unique, back-ends can have an internal UID (e.g. index)

Reviewer 2: you mean that in the sense of as follows?:
- When supported by the back-end implementation: the labels can be chosen by the user: could be ID, WKT2, any other attribute. Doesn't need to be unique.
- As fallback, back-ends can use an internal (unique) id (e.g. auto-increment index, UUID, hash function of geometry, ....)

Author: I'm not sure whether back-ends should be able to not support it, but we also don't know yet at which point/how users can choose this. So this is to be discussed in openeo-processes.
I guess back-ends always need an internal unique id in addition to the representation.

::: tip Be Careful with Data Types
As stated above, datacubes only contain scalar values. However, implementations may differ in their ability to handle or convert them. Implementations may also not allow mixing data types in a datacube. For example, returning a boolean value for a reducer on a numerical datacube may result in an error on some back-ends. The recommendation is to not change the data type of values in a datacube unless the back-end supports it explicitly.
:::

### Applying Processes on Dimensions

Some processes are typically applied "along a dimension". You can imagine said dimension as an arrow and whatever is happening as a parallel process to that arrow. It simply means: "we focus on _this_ dimension right now".

> 

Author: Feel free to open a PR for it as this is unrelated to vector data cubes. :-)

<figure>
    <img src="./datacubes/dc_flat.png" alt="Raster datacube flat representation: The 12 imagery tiles are now laid out flat as a 4 by 3 grid (bands by timesteps). All dimension labels are depicted (The timestamps, the band names and the x, y coordinates).">
    <figcaption>This is the 'raw' data collection that is our example datacube. The grayscale images are colored for understandability, and dimension labels are displayed.</figcaption>
</figure>

A vector datacube on the other hand could look like this:

<figure>
    <img src="./datacubes/vector.png" alt="An examplary vector datacube with 3 dimensions: 2 geometries are given for the `Geometries` dimension, along with 3 timesteps for the temporal dimension `time` and 4 bands in the `Bands` dimension.">
    <figcaption>An examplary vector datacube with 3 dimensions: 2 geometries are given for the <code>Geometries</code> dimension, along with 3 timesteps for the temporal dimension <code>time</code> and 4 bands in the <code>Bands</code> dimension.</figcaption>
</figure>

[Vector datacubes](https://r-spatial.org/r/2022/09/12/vdc.html) and raster datacubes are common cases of datacubes in the EO domain.

> A raster datacube has at least two spatial dimensions (usually named `x` and `y`) and a vector datacube has at least a geometries dimension (usually named `geometries`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A raster datacube has at least two spatial dimensions (usually named `x` and `y`) and a vector datacube has at least one geometries dimension (usually named `geometries`).
```

> These distinctions are just made so that it is easier to describe "special" cases of datacubes, but you can also define other types such as a temporal datacube that has at least a temporal dimension (usually named `t`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The purpose of these distinctions is simply to make it easier to describe "special" cases of datacubes, but you can also define other types such as a temporal datacube that has at least one temporal dimension (usually named `t`).
```

| 1 | `x`     | spatial  | `466380`, `466580`, `466780`, `466980`, `467180`, `467380`                  | 200m       | [EPSG:32627](https://epsg.io/32627) |
| 2 | `y`     | spatial  | `7167130`, `7166930`, `7166730`, `7166530`, `7166330`, `7166130`, `7165930` | 200m       | [EPSG:32627](https://epsg.io/32627) |
| 3 | `bands` | bands    | `blue`, `green`, `red`, `nir`                                               | 4 bands    | -                                   |
| 4 | `t`     | temporal | `2020-10-01`, `2020-10-13`, `2020-10-25`                                    | 12 days    | Gregorian calendar / UTC            |

Dimension labels are usually either numerical or text (also known as "strings"), which also includes textual representations of timestamps or geometries for example.
For example, temporal labels are usually encoded as [ISO 8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601) compatible dates and/or times and similarly geometries can be encoded as [Well-known Text (WKT)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry) or be represented by their IDs.

> Dimensions with a natural/inherent order are always sorted. These are usually all spatial and temporal dimensions. Dimensions without inherent order, in openEO `bands` for example, retain the order in which they have been defined in metadata or processes (e.g. through [`filter_bands`](https://processes.openeo.org/#filter_bands)), with new labels simply being appended to the existing labels.

Author: ```suggestion
Dimensions with a natural/inherent order (usually all spatial and temporal dimensions) are always sorted. Dimensions without inherent order (usually `bands`), retain the order in which they have been defined in metadata or processes (e.g. through [`filter_bands`](https://processes.openeo.org/#filter_bands)), with new labels simply being appended to the existing labels.
```

A geometries dimension is not included in the example raster datacube above and it is not used in the following examples, but to show how a vector dimension with two polygons could look like:

| name       | type   | labels | reference system |
| ---------- | ------ | ------ | ---------------- | 
| `geometry` | vector | `POLYGON((-122.4 37.6,-122.35 37.6,-122.35 37.64,-122.4 37.64,-122.4 37.6))`, `POLYGON((-122.51 37.5,-122.48 37.5,-122.48 37.52,-122.51 37.52,-122.51 37.5))` | [EPSG:4326](https://epsg.io/4326) |

> A dimensions with geometries can consist of points, linestrings, polygons, multi points, multi linestrings, or multi polygons.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A dimension with geometries can consist of points, linestrings, polygons, multi points, multi linestrings, or multi polygons.
```
